# Brno-Bystrc


Brno-Bystrc is an urban district in the northwest of the Statutory City of Brno. It consists of the Bystrc[note 1] (German: Bisterz, in Hantec Bástr), originally a separate municipality, which was annexed to Brno in 1960. Its cadastral territory covers an area of 27.24 km². The self-governing municipal district was established on 24 November 1990. It has over 24 000 inhabitants.

Bystrc is the largest urban district and the largest cadastral territory of Brno. On the territory of this urban district there are a number of Brno's recreational objects - the Brno Dam, Brno Zoo situated on Mniší hora, the Valley of Respite, the extensive Podkomorské lesy with the area of the May Fairy Tale (including Helen's and Ríš's well), Veveří Castle. However, Veveří Castle as well as the southern part of the Brno Dam were not originally part of Bystrc. Veveří Castle was for a long time part of the cadastral territory of Veverská Bítýška, while the southern part of the Brno Dam belonged mainly to the original cadastral territory of the village of Kníničky, which was flooded by the dam.

At the same time, Bystrc is one of the largest housing estates in Brno and one of the most important urban districts of Brno. The Bystrc part of the Brno Dam is the venue of the Ignis Brunensis, an important international fireworks competition show that attracts tens of thousands of spectators every year.

The whole of Bystrc is divided into three different parts - the so-called Bystrc I with the Old Bystrc represents the original village around the church of St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist by the Svratka River and the oldest prefabricated housing estate up to the so-called German or Hitler Highway, a multi-lane road crossing Bystrc. Bystrc II is a newer prefabricated housing estate west of the German Highway up to the Ečerova tram loop. In 2006, construction of the Kamechy Bystrc II/A housing estate began, which in its final form is to cover the area behind the prefabricated houses (Teyschlova Street) built after 1990 towards Žebětín.

The town hall is located near the Church of St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist by the Svratka River in old Bystrc. For the purposes of the Senate elections, the territory of the Brno-Bystrc district is included in the electoral district number 55.

There are also several vineyards in Bystrc (Díly, Kamenice, Pod Mniší hora).

## Character

The upper half of the emblem is identical to the emblem of the City of Brno (white and red stripe) the other white stripe is replaced by a fill above the blue surface of the raised water surface - the last blue stripe at the bottom of the emblem.

## Name

The original name of the settlement was Bystřec and was transferred to it from a watercourse that flowed swiftly, i.e. quickly. From the indirect falls (Bystrce, Bystrci, etc.) the new first fall Bystrc was formed.

## History
The documented history of Bystrc and the origin of this place name begins in 1373, when the Moravian Margrave Jan Jindřich gave Bystrc to the Augustinian monastery of St. Thomas. Bystrc was part of the estate of Veveří Castle, originally a landowner, with different owners since the 15th century. After 1848, Bystrc was redeemed from its obligations to the Veverian nobility. During the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, an unfinished section of the unfinished Vienna-Vratislav Exterritorial Highway was built on the territory of Bystrc. The liberation of Bystrc took place on 28 April 1945, which is reminiscent of the name of the local square. Already at the time of the construction of the dam, a residential area was proposed in the area of the rock above the lagoon on the Goat Mountain. However, it was never realised. The houses there were mostly designed by renowned Brno modern architects. In 1945, the famous architect Bohuslav Fuchs designed a holiday villa a little further away, which was built a year and a half later. On January 1957, by decision of the Regional National Committee, a large area around the Brno Dam was annexed to Brno, including, in addition to most of the Bystrce cadastre, the western part of the Kníničky cadastre, a small eastern part of the Veverská Bítýška cadastre, the southwestern part of the Rozdrojovice cadastre, the southern part of the Moravské Knínice cadastre and the southern tip of the Chudčice cadastre. On 1 July 1960, Bystrc itself was annexed to Brno, which until 31 July 1960 was also annexed to Brno. On 31 July 1976, together with the neighbouring Knínička, as well as the above-connected parts of the cadastres of neighbouring municipalities (there were newly established cadastral territories Chudčice I, Moravské Knínice I, Rozdrojovice I and Veverská Bítýška I within Brno), Bystrc formed a separate municipal district with its own local national committee. From 26 November 1971 to 30 April 1972 it was called Brno VII-Bystrc, then from 1 May 1972 just Brno-Bystrc. The current cadastral boundaries of Bystrc were acquired during the radical cadastral reform of Brno in the second half of the 1960s, and the modified cadastre of Bystrc includes, besides almost the whole of the original Bystrc cadastre, also the southern part of the original cadastral territory of Kníničky, almost the whole of the abolished cadastral territory of Veverská Bítýška I and the southern part of the abolished cadastral territory of Chudčice I. In the 1970s and 1980s, a large part of the above-mentioned unfinished section of the exterritorial highway was used to build a new partially multi-lane road through Bystřec. On 15 July 1976, the local national committee in Bystrc was abolished, and Bystrc and Kníničky were annexed to the Brno II municipal district, within which they remained until 1990, when the inhabitants of both districts demanded the creation of the new self-governing municipal districts of Brno-Bystrc and Brno-Kníničky. On 19 February 2015, the new cadastral and administrative boundary between Bystrc and Žebětín in the locality of Kamechy came into force.

Bystrc is divided into 16 basic settlement units: Bystrc-south, Foltýnova, Hrad Veveří, Kamechy-east, Kočičí žleb, Kozí horka-Chochola, Mniší hora, Myslivna-Obora, Náměstí 28. dubna, Pohádka máje, Polesí Žebětín, Přístavní, Rakovec, Teyschlova, Údolí oddechu and Vejrostova.

## Present

Bystrc retains the character of a quiet urban district of Brno with natural surroundings of residential buildings, plenty of greenery and opportunities for recreation despite its continuous development. There are very few companies and businesses in Bystrc that create jobs, 91% of employed Bystrc residents commute outside the district for work. Due to the age structure of the population and the lack of job opportunities, Bystrc functions as a base for the workforce of the City of Brno. The clearly dominant function of the municipality is residential and the labour market is only marginal.

There are sports clubs in Bystrc (FC Dosta Bystrc-Kníničky, Rugby Club Bystrc, chess club Bystrc Oilers, dragon boat club Draci Bystrc), two rowing clubs ČVK BRNO and LS BRNO and other interest organisations. The inhabitants of Bystrc have the opportunity to use quite extensive sports infrastructure.

In total, there are 17 sports grounds, a climbing wall (Vondrákova Street) and a dirt area in Bystrc.Regular cultural life takes place in the Social Centre on Odbojářská Street (concerts, theatre performances, exhibitions), in the local branch of the Mahen Library (exhibitions, openings, lectures), at Veveří Castle (concerts, entertainment events). The cultural department of the municipal authority organises feasts and Christmas markets.
